Overview
Enterprises rely on Hightouch to prepare and activate data from a central data store to
platforms and tools across the business, including CRMs, ad platforms, support tools, and
more. As you integrate more tools and platforms with your data warehouse, the value your
data provides increases, but so does the complexity of your Hightouch instance.
Additionally, you may need to provide many stakeholders access to Hightouch, from data
engineers to marketers to revenue operations administrators. Each of these team members
should have differentiated access and permissions. For example, you may want only your
data engineers to have the ability to configure credentials to your data warehouse,
marketers only be able to access configurations that power your marketing campaigns, and
only revOps have access to CRM configurations.
Hightouch's governance features empower businesses to organize their Hightouch instance,
control access and permissions regardless of their team size, and manage changes securely
and scalably.

Workspace organization
Before going in-depth into Hightouch's governance features, it's helpful to understand the
core concepts Hightouch uses to structure access and change management.
An is the parent “container” that represents you as a Hightouch customer. It
contains any number of Hightouch workspaces. A is a Hightouch instance that
users log into to use the Hightouch platform. On , you can create as many
workspaces as you need. Depending on your business's structure, you may create different
workspaces for different regions and brands or for separating testing and production
environments.

Each workspace has its own users and resources. A user is an individual with access to a
workspace. A user can be associated with one or more workspaces. A resource is any of the
building blocks of a workspace: data sources, destinations, models, syncs, and audiences.

Within the Hightouch dashboard, you can use and to organize and find your
models and syncs, whether you have a couple dozen or a couple thousand. For instance, you
can use folders to organize resources by department or structure your marketing
campaigns by their place in the marketing funnel. You can save groups of filters as a to
access them more easily later.

Access management
As organizations scale, it becomes imperative to streamline access and permissions.
Otherwise, organization and workspace admins can become overloaded by requests to
invite users or tweak their permissions. Hightouch's is easily
customizable and scalable to hundreds of users collaborating within an organization.
"To organize permissions for users, you can create and assign custom roles. A role is a set of
organization members with similar access to resources. For example, you could create a
"Marketing" role with access to marketing and advertising platforms or a “Data team” role
with access to data sources and models. A user can be assigned to multiple roles.

Any role you create are custom except for the organization admin role, which has full access
to all workspaces and resources in their organization. The organization admin role is the only
role that can manage (single-sign-on), billing, and other user groups.
To address access requests more scalably, organization admins don't assign permissions to
individual users. Instead, users inherit their permissions from the roles they belong to. The
permissions you can grant a role are highly granular—down to the specific resources and
actions a role can perform on those resources. For example, your "Marketing" role could have
full read-write access to ad platforms and audiences in Customer Studio, but read-only
permissions to data sources, models, and other destination types.

Roles integrate seamlessly with SSO. Hightouch supports SSO via third-party identity
providers (IdP), such as Okta and Azure Active Directory. You configure SAML SSO to
Hightouch on an organizational level and then provide access to specific workspaces and
resources by mapping groups in your IdP to roles you've created in Hightouch. Hightouch also
supports automatic provisioning via System for Cross-domain Identity Management (SCIM).

Change management
As your Hightouch usage scales across regions, business units, and teams, managing
change management and auditability within Hightouch becomes essential.
Hightouch is the only vendor in the market that natively supports . This feature
requires that designated roles seek approval from an admin group before making
configuration changes. For instance, if a "draft contributor" creates a new audience,
Hightouch would prompt them to save the audience configuration in draft mode and notify
the admin group for final approval and deployment.

Hightouch’s and Deployments feature allows you to designate specific
workspaces as "staging," "production," or whatever environments your organization requires.
You can then link and deploy resources between environments.

Suppose you are experimenting with changes to a CRM sync configuration in your staging
environment. Once the configuration is correct, you can deploy it to your production
environment. Before copying the configuration to a new sync in production, Hightouch
checks that the underlying resources match the linked counterparts in production.

Separating environments minimizes the risk of accidental changes or disruptions to the user-
facing experience. For example, using environments can help avoid overwriting CRM data

you didn't mean to or activating a marketing campaign prematurely.
Keeping resources separate lets you create as many as you want—usually in a development
environment—without cluttering other environments. And since changes don't automatically
deploy to linked resources, you can safely delete or update resources without worrying
about knock-on effects in other environments. Each resource also has its own history, which
you can inspect by examining its activity history and . These are immutable, so you
can be confident in their accuracy.

Hightouch offers audit logs so workspace admins can see what actions users took in-app
and when. Suppose someone notices that a sync has sent incorrect data to a destination. A
workspace admin can use audit logs to review changes made to the sync before the
incorrect data began to appear. The admin can correct the issue and—if necessary—alter
role permissions to avoid future incidents.

Summary
Hightouch is the industry leader in governance features for reverse ETL and composable
CDPs. Since our founding, we’ve invested heavily in observability and secure and scalable
permissioning. These investments allow you to protect your business systems, streamline
internal processes, and enable more teammates to embrace a data-first mindset securely.