Preface

Organizations have more data than ever before at their disposal. Still, even with all of this information,
many marketing teams find it difficult to drive outcomes that actually move the needle forward, and
many data teams struggle to tie their work to revenue-facing functions.
For years, data and marketing teams alike have relied on traditional Customer Data Platforms
(CDPs) to power personalization, targeting, and other customer-facing marketing efforts. However,
with the massive adoption of cloud data warehouses, now any organization, regardless of industry or
size, has access to near-infinite amounts of customer data. Many businesses are now adopting a
Composable CDP to combat this challenge to activate the rich insights living in their data warehouse.

A Quick History of CDPs

A CDP is an all-in-one marketing and data platform designed to help companies collect and store
customer data in a centralized database, so companies can easily build audiences, perform identity
resolution, and sync that data to downstream operational tools.
All traditional CDPs operate as black boxes, offering little to no configurability when it comes to
product features because everything is tightly integrated and bundled into a single product offering.
As such, traditional CDPs have five core components:

Packaged CDP

Event Collection 

CDPs come equipped with proprietary SDKs (software development
kits that organizations can use to collect behavioral events.

Data Storage

CDPs offer fully managed storage to house customer data.

Identity Resolution

CDPs have built-in identity resolution features to stitch together user
actions and attributes across touchpoints.

Audience Building

CDPs provide a rich suite of audience management tools to help
marketers build user cohorts and orchestrate user journeys across
marketing channels.

Data Syncing

CDPs provide out-of-the-box integrations with hundreds of third-
party APIs, enabling organizations to send audiences directly to their operational tools.

CDPs have been around for a long time, with Segment pioneering the space in 2011. Since then, data
and marketing teams in almost every industry have relied on these platforms to power their
customer-facing use cases.
These solutions emerged during a time when data collection, management, and activation were
extremely challenging. Prior to CDPs, there was a huge rift between data and marketing teams
because data tools weren’t built for marketers, and marketing tools weren’t built for data teams.
Moving data between various applications and systems was an engineering nightmare as it required
a combination of custom scripts, API integrations, or manual CSV files. More often than not,
the end result of these efforts was a spiderweb of pipelines powered by intricate workflows within
various tools.
Traditional CDPs resolved this complex web of pipelines by introducing a single platform that
automatically integrated with downstream applications. This meant data teams no longer had to
worry about managing data flows, and marketing teams no longer had to worry
about data accessibility. Data and engineering teams could implement event collection, and
marketing teams could easily self-serve and build audiences to power their downstream digital
channels.

Problems with Traditional CDPs

While CDPs set out to solve a key challenge, the tightly coupled and siloed architectures of these
platforms introduce several complexities for today’s modern organization.

Storage and Data Ownership

Traditional CDPs create a second source of truth because they force companies to store and
manage data outside of their existing data infrastructure.

Flexibility

Legacy CDPs lock customers into an opinonated rigid data model. This makes it impossible to
represent relationships between users and other entities like accounts, teams, workspaces, playlists,
or devices.

Time-to-Value

The average CDP implementation takes over six months to complete, and that’s not even accounting
for onboarding time. Additionally, trying to support new use cases or adding new data sources
introduces even more complexity because data teams are forced to build new data pipelines and
rearchitect the CDP any time a new attribute needs to be stored.

Incomplete Data

Since CDPs only collect and store behavioral data, they create a fragmented view of the customer.
Marketers have no ability to access or leverage any existing first-party attributes (income, age,
gender, address) or the custom data models the data team has built. Some CDPs have tacked on
features to interface directly with data warehouses, but these features are often lacking and
separate from the core product offerings.

Cost

Traditional CDPs are extremely expensive because every feature is bundled together. This means
companies have to pay for collection, storage, and modeling, even if they’ve already solved for these
functions internally. Inevitably, many companies end up paying to store the same data twice (once in
a warehouse and once in a CDP.)

Ultimately traditional CDPs come in a “one-size-fits-all” model that makes them very rigid for hyper-
specific use cases 

For example:

With a traditional CDP, its possible to send an email to cart abandoners, but its almost impossible 
to send that same email with a targeted local store incentive because store data is not natively 
available in a CDP)

With a traditional CDP, its possible to show ads to people who have visited product pages, but its 
almost impossible to ensure those same ads arent shown when a product is out of stock Keeping 
product catalogs up-to-date in ad platforms is not possible with a CDP because data has to be 
conformed under a strict user/account object, and product data is not natively available
 With a traditional CDP, its possible to send an SMS about a new promotion, but its almost 
impossible to send that same SMS to people who have a high propensity of redeeming it A CDP 
cannot power recommendation engines or data science models The data warehouse is the only 
platform that has the data needed to facilitate these use cases.
Each of these marketing use cases points out a fundamental problem: traditional CDPs have no 
understanding of custom objects (eg, local stores, products, propensity models) With a traditional 
CDP, its impossible to create a Spotify Wrapped campaign or serve personalized recommendations 
to specific audiences Traditional CDPs boil everything down to clicks and sessions.

The reality is businesses are much more complicated than behavioral data, and modern marketers 
should have access to a 360-degree view of the customer That includes everything from behavioral 
data to offline actions, to data science models, to first-party attributes This level of granularity is only 
possible with a Composable CDP powered by the data warehouse

The Rise of the Composable CDP

A Composable CDP has the same goal as a traditional CDP: activating customer data to
your downstream tools. But rather than operating as a separate entity and storing data
outside of your current data infrastructure like a traditional CDP does, a Composable CDP
lets you create audiences, personalize journeys, and send your existing customer data
directly from your data warehouse to your frontline marketing tools.

While CDPs set out to solve the correct problem, they did so with the fundamental flaw that they did
not build upon an immensely powerful technology rapidly being adopted by organizations as their
central store of customer data - the cloud data warehouse.

The rapid adoption and investment in cloud data warehouses has caused many companies to realize
that they don’t need to purchase a separate platform to store data they already own in their
warehouse–inevitably leading many companies to build on top of their existing data infrastructure
and adopt a Composable CDP.

By simply integrating Hightouch with their existing data warehouse, organizations are able to form
what has since been coined the “Composable CDP” by the likes of cloud leaders like Snowflake and
Databricks. This architectural approach provides unparalleled flexibility allowing companies to solve
complex use cases in both a timely and cost-efficient manner, enabling organizations to own and act
on all of their data.

One of the biggest differences between a traditional CDP and a Composable CDP is that a
Composable CDP lets you start with your current data (wherever it is) and activate it immediately
rather than implementing and purchasing an entirely new tool.

Traditional CDP vs. Composable CDP

The modularity of this architecture gives companies far more extensive capabilities and flexibility to
uniquely solve their most complex customer-facing use cases. This means organizations don’t have
to conform data to the requirements and constraints of another platform and can instead take
advantage of their existing data assets to drive value immediately.

The easiest way to understand this difference is to view them as two restaurant menu offerings.
Traditional CDPs follow a table d'hôte model, which refers to a fixed menu option where the entire
meal is offered at a set price. Conversely, a Composable CDP follows an à la carte model, with
individual pricing where people can choose items tailored to their specific preferences.

We didn’t choose an off-the-shelf CDP like Segment because a
substantial amount of engineering is required to get it up and running,
and at the end of the day, it is just a second source of truth. Why would
we buy a CDP when all of our data modeling is already being done
directly in Snowflake?

Benefits of a Composable CDP

Flexibility

A Composable CDP gives organizations
immediate access to any and all of their
data–not just clickstream events.
Ultimately this means marketing teams
can leverage any data type to easily
accommodate the complex breadth of
their use cases.

Security

Because a Composable CDP simply
builds on top of existing infrastructure,
organizations don’t have to worry about
data leaving their cloud environment.

Modularity

Companies have full control to choose
what technologies and processes they
use for data collection, storage,
modeling, and activation. This allows
organizations to tailor their architecture
to the specific organizational outcomes
they're looking to drive.

Time-to-Value

A Composable CDP enables
organizations to circumvent long
implementation times and activate their
existing data assets immediately to drive
business outcomes.

Composable CDP Use Cases

This modular architecture works with any organization regardless of maturity, and businesses in all
industries are seeing the immediate benefits of building on top of their data warehouse.

IntelyCare

IntelyCare Saves $1M
in Marketing Spend

We ran an experiment around first-shift bonuses and followed different
test groups through the application process to see how much the bonus
influenced shift completion rate. Without Hightouch, this experiment cost
us $1.3M. With Hightouch we’re able to intelligently target applicants and
achieve the same incremental gains at an annual cost of $260k.

Ben Tenglesen
VP of Data Science


ChalHoub Group

Chalhoub Group
Increases Ad Revenue
by 40% and Lowers
CAC by 30%

We used to have to go to our CRM and spend hours building customer
segments, and manually upload them to our marketing platforms, but
this data wasn’t refreshed, clean, or debugged in any way. We could only
do this once a year because we couldn’t afford to take two weeks off to
upload static files.

Tomasz Mazur
Head of Customer Acquisition

Warner Music Group

Warner Music Group
Powers 1000+ custom
audiences

Within six weeks, we implemented Hightouch on Snowflake and got out
hundreds of audiences, which made marketers and agencies happy.

Itay Rahat
VP of Product, Audiences, and
Marketing Technology


Getting Started with a Composable CDP

Most organizations think they need to reach a certain level of data maturity before they can fully take
advantage of a Composable CDP. In reality, this is a misconception. Hightouch offers the capabilities
of a traditional CDP without the tightly coupled architecture.

Customer 360 Toolkit

Stitch your existing customer data into rich,
actionable profiles directly in your warehouse.
Link all of your user actions and attributes to a
single comprehensive profile without writing any
of code.

Activation

Automate and schedule data syncs to 200+
destinations to ensure your data is always fresh

and up-to-date, so your marketers can run ad-
hoc experiments and campaigns in minutes.

Customer Studio

Build and define rich audience cohorts to power
your most complex personalization use cases.
Perform A/B testing and cross-channel
orchestration and easily analyze audience
breakdowns and performance.

